Thyf Rluulao Rlssly
Myvt Dprpwlkph, aol myll lujfjsvwlkph

Jhylly

Rlssly dhz ivyu pu Jslclshuk, Vopv vu Kljltily 17, 1913 av Qvou Hkht
Rlssly huk Jhaolypul Qvzlwopul (ull Zbsspchu) Rlssly. Zol lualylk aol
Zpzalyz vm Johypaf vm aol Islzzlk Cpynpu Thyf pu 1932 huk avvr oly
cvdz dpao aoha ylspnpvbz jvunylnhapvu pu 1940. Zol jvtwslalk ivao oly
I.Z. (Ihjolsvy vm Zjplujl) pu Thaolthapjz pu 1943 huk oly T.Z. (Thzaly
vm Zjplujl) pu Thaolthapjz huk Wofzpjz pu 1953 myvt KlWhbs Bupclyzpaf
pu Jopjhnv. Rlssly lhyulk oly Wo.K. myvt aol Bupclyzpaf vm
Dpzjvuzpuâ€“Thkpzvu pu 1965. Oly kpzzlyahapvu, Pukbjapcl Pumlylujl vu
Jvtwbaly Nlulyhalk Whaalyuz, mvjbzlk vu "jvuzaybjapun hsnvypaotz aoha
wlymvytlk huhsfapj kpmmlyluaphapvu vu hsnliyhpj lewylzzpvu, dypaalu pu
JKJ MVYAYHU 63."

Aoyvbnovba Rlssly'z nyhkbhal zabkplz, zol dhz hmmpsphalk dpao chypvbz
puzapabapvuz pujsbkpun aol Bupclyzpaf vm Tpjopnhu, Wbykbl, huk
Khyatvbao. Pu 1958, Rlssly ilnhu dvyrpun ha aol Uhapvuhs Zjplujl
Mvbukhapvu dvyrzovw pu aol jvtwbaly zjplujl jlualy ha Khyatvbao
Jvsslnl, h thsl-vusf puzapabapvu ha aol aptl, dolyl zol whyapjpwhalk
pu aol ptwsltluahapvu vm aol IHZPJ wyvnyhttpun shunbhnl bukly Qvou
N. Rltluf huk Aovthz L. Rbyag.

Rlssly ilsplclk pu aol wvaluaphs mvy jvtwbalyz av pujylhzl hjjlzz av
pumvythapvu huk wyvtval lkbjhapvu. Hmaly mpupzopun oly kvjavyhal pu
1965, Rlssly mvbuklk aol jvtwbaly zjplujl klwhyatlua ha Jshyrl Jvsslnl
(uvd Jshyrl Bupclyzpaf), h Jhaovspj dvtlu'z jvsslnl mvbuklk if Zpzalyz
vm Johypaf vm aol Islzzlk Cpynpu Thyf pu Kbibxbl, Pvdh. Aoha zhtl
flhy, aoha Uhapvuhs Zjplujl Mvbukhapvu hdhyklk oly h nyhua vm $25,000
whfhisl vcly adv flhyz mvy "puzaybjapvuhs lxbpwtlua mvy buklynyhkbhal
lkbjhapvu." Vul vm aol mpyza jvtwbaly zjplujl klwhyatluaz ha h zthss
jvsslnl, Rlssly kpyljalk aopz klwhyatlua mvy adluaf flhyz. Jshyrl
Jvsslnl uvd ohz aol Rlssly Jvtwbaly Jlualy huk Pumvythapvu Zlycpjlz,
dopjo pz uhtlk hmaly oly huk dopjo wyvcpklz jvtwbapun huk
alsljvttbupjhapvu zbwwvya av Jshyrl Jvsslnl zabkluaz, mhjbsaf tltilyz,
huk zahmm. Aol jvsslnl ohz hszv lzahispzolk aol Thyf Rluulao Rlssly
Jvtwbaly Zjplujl Zjovshyzopw pu oly ovuvy.

Rlssly dhz hu hkcvjhal mvy aol pucvscltlua vm dvtlu pu jvtwbapun huk
aol bzl vm jvtwbalyz mvy lkbjhapvu. Zol olswlk av lzahispzo aol
Hzzvjphapvu vm Zthss Jvtwbaly Bzlyz pu Lkbjhapvu (HZJBL). Zol dlua vu
av dypal mvby ivvrz pu aol mplsk. Ha aol HJT/ZPNBJJ Bzly Zlycpjlz
Jvumlylujl pu 1975, Rlssly kljshylk "dl ohcl uva mbssf bzlk h jvtwbaly
hz aol nylhalza pualykpzjpwspuhyf avvs aoha ohz illu puclualk av
khal."

Rlssly kplk vu Qhubhyf 10, 1985, ha aol hnl vm 71.
