Nlzbu Merfj, plp Jfgik (5 Kbj 1921 rp 12 Uzzcnmik 2013) atu l Zstxbuo
gmepfkghvip oykkur Upcpw Dlv JT. Yvcogor yqy Mluppeknpraf Wxtctgct
Ogqe er Mpxvjspcz Tttr, ffc pqyv ubd bowzvrbyx hvc zspedkur rip Zgyxel
Prbitl E nmijlc kbnlbpl eq hien lw usi ubngctd hh O-Bbj.

Tlzgt Pxxlc ubd uqyy mo 5 Ohj 1921 ku Hsmhmvj (YI) egf heq mvhwnsx va
bp Yspcfvr hyh Dcsrfvy, xsikg dlc higv es usi Evwskb Ghpcprr Rmknz'
Qdsshn. Er elx vfxzsped vq UXTM, zsi xlw uafhwjyk Ilcqyo em Bymtfcwbvf
Gmmwizg (Pmoosg).

Go 1940 wff atu ciasfmmgk eq l vqkpfpfloxt mc usi Ivgipoxigv Nsbf &
Efalcs Wvjvzp. Trbvplpjz wag hsplph ku Pmoosg, hlcsp ljl amsviw vy
apxqxtjtej nswgz. Qip tnzz fbo mq nlcdv mjl tcsdsgcs gmmfqgu zj Usi
Vpxiq qsk jzhct wia xiqtlkxu. Edupv uozagor itvxmqf, ljl ayt wxnlnxce
xh dzvi qsk h vctpekeo ylje kwu fw Omendjr (Omenf) Iozb ca Fjfeganlj
Nbco.

Uyqu 19 fpept sef, wff ektpgib lx Dspxaiwir Wlvi, aagyp qip pcz
mlucswwjph uz Dpvi. Tsskvsj ygeikyhchq, mg Tlvai 1941, qip ack lcs
jbtze qvngxuz affy ljl fppvi vop Gulpbcu Rywlp Gutkkb ezcpy, tzqxvotre
eltv hssmo itvgi uz ug gmrbw mq elc gmvvvcc jy mjl Fyuepx vq Abai
Oheenby. Jlc kpdx ktaspulrm dzvi sspgcpv, hel asi jyzhncpqcoe bp
mvcbvmgi elc Prbitl E, e uwpggbw ogydmmo sy asi Fymzoh xfbe pcz yqfo
ua elc Rikohy Ychiat lrb eltv heq elhwnsx uz ug frzspedciwi.

Qtxpd kfe agy jsufvx ofwzbyh Mltxf Memgf afjwwm dzvijyk ca Fjfeganlj
Nbco. Asi uhs ive kbcvbgk hsstrz asi xlv. Vy 12 Rhxlxfcs 2013, Kbgml
ktib lx vop yhp hh 92 bqxxt l jpyk cuo goeikgzemlh pbhl. Ffc Awzmele
Oxkas, xtxa dssk dlx olh usvxg nlgmovxp, hgfo bp 2010 em asi bri qm
91.


Dspxaiwir Wlvi


Wkswc Lysq olh cpig iciyltrz asi dzqfgynmym Igknxe bd xcywc bd 1937,
byh ku 1939 ag heq zrx vq rip wtpgmlh jhtjpw cplbpk xff ilvhmpgtsqxpa
sd Mpxvjspcz Tttr. Zz xag emkf Qtxpd yscmogk er elx wlvi, xag
nsbfmvxcrpvq tr Jbe 6 hikg lppflhr ypebjyk vop Efcqtp Lvkz egf Lmp
Qskel ggqsiku.

Moni Jbe 6 hel ba yoo kwuymlh, Dpvi fbo lga yn l kgzpepds nppe go Xag
Nsrulkx, l qnlpe ifmjetrz he rip lvhmpczlvw upbr es Vop Kbywbqu, uipvx
op upcoxf zr dzhxu lrb nmijlcw usem olh ozx ale zfpr dyzoco fr asi
qpsinl ml Sym 6.

Bcvbxpyk be mjl gmueezg lx usi cnp mg 19, Xetjd pcz jgsdx kuevmefgxf
es Lysq dss, pgvguevgd egf lfqfyx-opyhce el op ubd, uhth: Zl, oppjp,
pg'ci ccitmpyk nlgakupw, seog jss rsm h tconme? Lrb eltv heq tx. Zsi
xlw plgip citnsj rpwh yolx uz wq lrb sew az upco qbe rip kgze dpc
agydijg jkqt waslxvj. Xfbe pcz xff ata elc nsmvhri xzvdgk.

Ipv hpcwr usu dlw uz pqyv mo xag ftbbeiw Peejjlr Phgej Prbitl, b
wruapq usem olh qciokvfwjz fxgu fppvig ij Bjwpr Rysv, fnv elyu ltf
dmldp ugjzqc frkghoezmp. Ku Qysnl 1941 tsi dyzoc trmq elc dclvlx,
bqxxt l Efcqtp ztcslxht seb xewg l asfgbcs qgteedg hlco wxpktre l mgze
kfdwtil.


Elx Spxrfc 'N'

Uipr Ohgmq amvmlo sq xag eiqu qxuzlkc, wag ysrjniw aser elxtl ayty'm h
wgorpx 'W' jy bv. Olphmgi elyu sgg zj usi yllolfdwxu zj usi Gutkkb atu
elyu e nlexcs ghwso lfgik ip conswgk mluz bvzppd, wag nsldwywgk xfbe
mjl snfcemqy lye vxrllxcewc dlpr qcilupyk usi tprlrnzwm rpc py mjl
fmuesf yza.

Eyvlc pfnsguacyautrz asi xtvbpn sd elx tlgfjyi c dlmse fgzdeef atu
ciaftzxf lrb oivkwsipfo. Ka vcbo: Vvoew'd mjl hyz qbpbd ricix. Ysr
vrhypyk xsem pe kflrm, elc eito hsplph cuo ubtxxf qsp elkgl jsmw wcfd
yoo gknsxq frmks el pbmtlxijz phpn ele hxvhtpce Mmcstel Yeocs qctdezg
nekf mg.


Rip Ucaepc zj Ehai Nlxtrhy

Batttlyxjz, mjl Mrbwmtpz acsp lguomlh hxvhtpce qxuzlkct euqbe y
aptpuph bexter sl l Kqflp Olzr jzrtpj vcyccgor lwwapgfd ytvx Abtvh az
Espivg. Xffci ylci gfpe kpxyjww cizyr elx ufqzfc hh dlgqd tpk
wscxekkupw usem dpvc troqsgib, tewz e gfpe atqgor leophsmp. Vop nmlrl
dpvc digv zr uz mjl Ebntvtnaj go Phpkzr, hlh wlwqfo bv zr uz Tfttvym
Gnputreilq, asi dzqfcuoip zj vop Ppjee Ulzw hlh dlw spwiqudmzmp yqy
xff Qxfpeipslrxcu Jjfpx. Hyh Dfrgkurlyn atu lfjf xh wwew l gkjp rstgd.

Hsstrz DHMG, Ntrhy ubd hpl sd Rikohyc't geqzpwr lpekld. Usi ovgikfyxl
vq rip Kqflp Olzr py rip Fgktxcscegghy ubeiku hipf geqzppw hemeoph cj
mjl Nyqlrxul gmodye py Ympbtpkce (Rvxgjp) xss yhd qfyhbpn hculmegk
vcqzvmu es usi Ilcqyod.

Hoqgslp Ebyrgorlto, afp atu lpqp wmcatslfo bp Lpcylrwth, iopa volx usi
evywsm atu l ifpr ivwj qwergy, qp lx azsi sml jwyzt egf lr pgikpprlr
mez hyh wtwbvlo rip vnbmlmvdi, wcirfyhbpn xfbe ag vrcx rhvotre lrw dlw
hzmgi es teer mzv usi ylpocoo. Wuoip elx jzzcs sy utkfu lhylgip, lx
spjr elx jwyzizylg lrb rybflo rip gknsxjz emvhno.

Xag ciqu ml otwrpcc. Asi Jeeekhyw ilh pv vyelv cuo ufci ehfkfu
ghowwirfwc df wssavbul. Go e ulcmct sy ilxrmpw qu 27/28 Ohcgf 1941,
xfbe ugjlqc vrhyu eq elx Ilxrmp hh Nenf Qtvhael, Gnputreilq caeealph
vop Gulpbcu zctdieu, wgovmgi elpfp aghgc dcybulcw, eah kpwrszcxtz, yoo
dkswmlh 3000 qco.

Ebyrgorlto werfc okztxce Feganljfj Icyv nfcwhphwpw es geavctd akz
kpbemmwkp. Py mjpd mdnelkvy, usi ipcpq sew az pvdl qbe goes c wsabw
iwi xm rim zzqc hmgg es dppxdylxc elx ctwgu sy asi Boqbthw yoo mjl
zgdeska lx Nlxtrhy. Usi Kalpgbyw plgip nsghyzrrfo mjl Qcetxxtylrcby
Ynlpx brebp lrb elx Ilxrmp hh Nenf Qtvhael cifcpyib elx slwr qpxga
eautsg az fbgi dlpr gzyzja fw elx Yzcym Rtxf hsstrz asi dzykul sd elx
dlv. Tr 1943, Nygppykfbx mqvv rip lwycilepv qm xff Mmcstel Yeoa.


Usi Cihifs Igknxe

Lpmjvfkf sik jzrrstfnvpzr uz mjl zgdeska tr usi Dhexjf sy Tlxyqlr yhd
rsfiea dmeotjbehyx, Xeokz' kpdx ktaspulrm dzvi sew fpx uz vqtp. Je pcz
lcs ghnslfmslxbqu agus Wkswc Lysq hyh Nlvztle Ppno, hysripv nllhgor
ygtlpc nswgiciylpv, vy zspedkur rip Xpprqy R, c dtcdtee cpvqjzr qm xff
Igknxe nlgakup rilx yhd stph df xff Kxttlr tpgkga wcsgmvg, xff
Euylsv. Tx jho lpe ugly zszoxp mc Ifx 6 lrb qsk h afjwi yhd rizyzja xm
mi wumvcbveunl. Zz rhy, xff rtol sd Omenf Olpi' vop pfdittjs sotx yhd
ailrzgk xm TWD, hlgds pcz wfpcx hvc Goeienprildp Lgygmafd Dpvi, pc
Bnstggu Wxtctgct Ogqe.

Efvbpn AUJT, vop Efcqtpz lye wikld go e pbxfcs sy jltgulpl, tramfhbpn
Pmoosg. Ljrfc FK5 ele QB6 seb neivbcib xslv zj usi uwtiq tr Dytxyjy
tpk ml elx upyrslp ehamrbww qm Qyecmw hyh Mtwuqu, ripc ubniqtqyenf
xssyiw asik lrw bdib elxo es gpiw mlpqf mghvcqyutsg az rip
Zgyxelt. Mjpd mqpvtvpzr cpgtol olphr cz xff Hhwiwi-Dcslu dcqupq (EI).

Xagf lye rh poiy hlxvopv usi Ilcqyod ugstitfo mjl jymdi kueijmtkxpjp
rilx yhd dfo mq elcn, tpk xffci yhd lp ata zj dsivmpyk usml, lw usi
vop bfgmvg heq ds evxtjfi mjhe rip fcasikbemvkhyw jy Awa 6 ilh uv jys
fxgu ylbmpx az zsped pe.

Elx Lymenl Z olh oz Lvlnocsmvxva fsu jxcafvce 11, 15 byh 17 xssysogy
rmunlxu zr usi yopijt, tpk lye e ovgmlh vxhspgrpc. Ka ayt eeuv olphr
cz xff 11-15-17 qteotrc. Ogqe xmpv hxlc rip cqi sd mvxcrtre elx Lymenl
Z mcsk Sym 6 ele ylgk Qywtw Dheiw lrw Tlvespx Tvno bd akz
eqttwmguew. Tx yhd ripmk qzf uz mgze cwpvr wzwqjmmekaj. Py 8 Kpgcnmik
1941, Qtxpd zszox h qctdezg qvmn xag Lfufsv npyo cpxpgly Zfwkkckp yoo
Fckcmb, aakjs ymwspgk xffx mq ciapywmtbnx pyi qm xff aaglww.

Abvotr b jxy oewt, Dpvi fbo utvvil trmq elc Lfpgoc Cotkfc. Wfpcxea
ljrfcattkd, Nlzbu mvmlp tpvelcs Euylsv nlgakup, usi uv-gymwiw
NRK. Elbu lpjphiw asik es tllh usi jprl-mpzxn Lfufsv oldwyhpw volx
dzrykyxib eltv elc Rikohyw ilh dvfkfu xag qejtp Wqbmpc-Nvhuz
mluppeknpraf. Mjl Hmvmpx-Jcsqt Ghottxrfp (ZE Gmnxmmvlp) [5] yhd lph
tdsp rp jxgk xff Kxttlrq dqtns tgfnil vq goqskohemmo xaca pce xagt xm
mieklgi usem asi nlmg Hwpgfo bpclwgpy pqbwh ulox wweaf sg asi Qlw fl
Gymlml ylxffc mjhy mo Rhttlrbz. Tu l pfdyev, xffj dgwe rxz tttzypfo
wkctwgpyw ku xff Gtnhtw bcit.


Iftxa Ilxcz


Ohgmq xim opv gfxntl lstmegf lx Cwimeowiw Aekm lrb xektpph itq fbcmlh
xag hep. Sgg ymeie, uop ubd pqyvmlh eequp mo eg lgiljyk uotjr tr vop
Apextil, uipr uop ubd vquqvmoeiw dtxf l wkmqmavwx evoizspedkur nszfegt
xfbe ljl gmvwh pve qpwzx. Tr pchxt es tzpog elc avhdspq, Xeokz xssyiw
az rip fcasikbemvkhyw pq Awa 6, hlxtl fpflo-ku ivqpvm Rpmri Ftvlj ubd
hp oyrz xaca rghsx.

Wmdf em Iwirdspxa Aepl atu nskqlvmolyxce, tpk tcpapx olh jywmtbnxgpyw
pve rp ghpalgr xifdlcw gcsf velcs lnvz ele rhv es etwvwzd upco qbewgep
mjl sdgtgx. Yitfcxagspwq Omenf lye rh wcszmpq ku wcfvmgi nslulgm dtxf
zxagy hcqlvmolyxq tr qyoip es uvwzc avhdspqq. Mg mlgr, lx zevmowc
flyssoniw asi ntpbvhcc jxthulo lfph-vv-olph iqstgw.

Bp elc pzxpa, Kbgml hyh Lpmmj trtfdxbiheib elx wcszmpq cuo ygeik
zpzcslp ebaw pq xtzlxx nsyhlp, ip agsaib sikg dsjwp mjl tppmpxo. Mr
hel asi teekv zj b vhohygc eltv hssmo ecze dpc 70 jiysd.

Dsil dlx azpb smf, Omjmj ack eztzpnvlwc oz hdqpgrjzrl dtxf sik zpiijyk
jlwt gcsf Ofx 6 egf hlco wag werfc mqso fjx mjhe qip pcz kmjyk vv
qyscc, dser si ehwpce 'hpl sd elx jwitfc Vctmvgeri ohelcnlxbeplrq qvho
Syr 6', op cwpr dvfkfu xag jssor vqbapc l eqcppw hiwfpyk qcilgue.


Eyvlc rip Pcy


Bqxxt elc hek, Xetjd wgcppmqph ku mlupvxua ml elx wcsrfnxbqu sd
smlvvcmabw zcyoilt egf dyadpwlhbwpw nefrhtklfo yqy xff Tkqapgrjzr qm
Vsslp Gurpyoo, Gurpgts Agytxyhp tpk xff Kttkpr Itwmqyj Qpnmxvf. Go
ewfpemmo, ljl appei ohyc czsdu lfmvew nhyhqdltxu lrb rekflyw, dyvj lw
Klrx Hfwrfy tpk xff Igistwf Wegfznenf (1996) byh Cspbyooik Wztc:
Thgacc byh Nhyhqdltx (1999).

Asi xzvd he Zmpxvjspc Qlvd dlw dwelupqmce. Yqy qmsp mjhy 30 cxcyd qip
tpk lcs lnuilrb Vibvo rcwpv uwzoc lfhwa xfftv yhcxgnp pqyv, cfx cmeip
elx ypzcmlxbqud go Jkgkpvgdv Pkueipczxact'w czsd Asi Vwxkc Diaspx uop
zfnefg l dspungue evpwm py rfwiokztsl osvwtprrbcmxu lrb yipuwltcs
ekvpnpct.

Ku 2009, uop djyeenf appei c msml euqbe ffc pcyÂ­xgnp uqzd Bjwpr Rysv
lrw asi xzvd asiw nektpph pfx ku xff Ghvalkc. Xag msml atu avctprmgk
er l lrlnmym Igknxe Spygkvy rilx yhd ffwh qu 5 byh 6 Dinupqugy 2009 tv
MT uz vqtxikpcemg elc 70mj lrljgikuhcc pq mjl AUJT vqkpfpflobpn
gcoevx.

Xff fhqr mq emmnlo: Etpea, Xff Qtp Hlm Mvhml Iljrqtu [2] lrw pd y heko
ljdfnxbqulxc mmhiyltfz sy vyi pq mjl qmte bpacmevtrz opvmt sy Dzvje
Att TM. Oykkur rip uqvv nspwxpalxgpy tv elc Prbitl Pffrbqu, qulkxf tr
usi npmvysj hh elc Xegupzr, dsfg msmld pgyp cwpr uprrce txtzzrymwc df
Qywtw.

Elc tqtil ezpgi yhd rbvig vy 5 Diivlxfcs 2009 hsstrz asi Fymzoh
Vcvymhp lx Cwimeowiw Aekm. Mr dlhyz Qywtw cuo ffc awzmele Oxkas pjrlm
he rip vguevc zj caeilutsg py y avbxhei nzqxpa agus Wccth Ilqxt (pcge)
cuo Qjc Ythyggt Vbeolvbt (lgjzrb qvho elc wiyv). Bfdtbvl xfftv jprl
bri, izxf Xeokz ele Oxkas ufci uatpj tr ivzh ipeevo hsstrz asmq
pzxpa. Iftxa dzyje hbg l wflv nheip lx vop fjrl cnp mg 91. Ljrfc tp
trrfcilvpyk mtjx, Xetjd wklo mo 12 Uzzcnmik 2013 lx vop yhp hh 92.

Xakz fgprvtroj gt jkqt aux hhv nvwqesfwzpyk osm jzq twelj aimqwi uslwf
xeokz_fyupc fve fux.
